1.1 • WHAT IS THE INTERNET? 5
ISPs that provide access to end systems must also be interconnected. These lower-
tier ISPs are thus interconnected through national and international upper-tier ISPs
and these upper-tier ISPs are connected directly to each other. An upper-tier ISP
consists of high-speed routers interconnected with high-speed fiber-optic links. Each
ISP network, whether upper-tier or lower-tier, is managed independently, runs the
IP protocol (see below), and conforms to certain naming and address conventions.
We’ll examine ISPs and their interconnection more closely in Section 1.3.
End systems, packet switches, and other pieces of the Internet run protocols that
control the sending and receiving of information within the Internet. The Transmission
Control Protocol (TCP) and the Internet Protocol (IP) are two of the most impor-
tant protocols in the Internet. The IP protocol specifies the format of the packets
that are sent and received among routers and end systems. The Internet’s principal
protocols are collectively known as TCP/IP. We’ll begin looking into protocols in
this introductory chapter. But that’s just a start—much of this book is concerned with
networking protocols!
Given the importance of protocols to the Internet, it’s important that everyone
agree on what each and every protocol does, so that people can create systems and
products that interoperate. This is where standards come into play. Internet standards
are developed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) [IETF 2020]. The IETF
standards documents are called requests for comments (RFCs). RFCs started out
as general requests for comments (hence the name) to resolve network and protocol
design problems that faced the precursor to the Internet [Allman 2011]. RFCs tend
to be quite technical and detailed. They define protocols such as TCP, IP, HTTP (for
the Web), and SMTP (for e-mail). There are currently nearly 9000 RFCs. Other bod-
ies also specify standards for network components, most notably for network links.
The IEEE 802 LAN Standards Committee [IEEE 802 2020], for example, specifies
the Ethernet and wireless WiFi standards
